Sick of waiting for your
CIA test to pass or
having to manage different CII
servers for different teams using
Buildkite. You can run fast
and reliable CIA pipelines for
every type of project, whether
it's backend tests, mobile apps,
or even custom hardware build
kites agent helps you scale
to thousands of parallel jobs
and your secrets and source
code never leave your infrastructure.
There's great documentation, a clean
web UI, and plugins for
different types of tools. Visit
Buildkite that's K I T
e.com/hanselman for a 14 day
free trial. And see how
Shopify has scaled from 300
to 1500 engineers while keeping
their build times under five
minutes, that's built kite.com/hanselman. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes today. I'm talking with
Carol Nichols. She's the owner of
the 32 consultancy. The author
of the rust programming language
book was Steve  as
well as the wonderful rust
in motion video series. How
are you? Great, thank you
for having me on. So
you're a rust core contributor.
What does that mean to
be a core contributor? I
am part of the core
team, which is the team
that makes overarching decisions having
to do with the projects.
So there's the compiler team
and the language team do
a lot of the technical
work as far as evolving
the language and maintaining the
compiler. The core team is
more of the, what is
the direction of the projects?
What do we want to
say as far as describing
Russ evolution? How do we
talk with production users? Things
like that. Is, is that
something that one is like
nominated for? Or do you
just kind of like sidle
into the job? How does
one become a core member?
Is that like, cause there's
a lot of people who
are listening who want to
get involved in open source
and it's all that they
can think about to like
maybe fix a spelling error
in the docs. How does
one make themselves known and
then work their way up
to effectively? What is leading?
Yeah. So a lot of
the core team members are
leaders of some of the
sub teams. And, but not
everyone. I kind of got
invited by doing a whole
bunch of work that no
one else was doing. And
that got noticed, and I
got asked to join the
core team. So in general,
I think we're, we're still
trying to figure out how
we want the project to
rerun. That's one of the
things we're struggling with on
the core team is how
should the governance of this
big open source project work.
And so it's been pretty
ad hoc, but in general,
if you like the different
teams that have different responsibilities,
usually have a meeting, mostly
in chat, sometimes on video
to discuss the kinds of
things that we want to
work on together as a
team and often teams have
smaller issues or, or ways
people can help out, or
you see people in the
meeting saying, Oh, I wish
I wish we had time
to do this. And that's
a great opportunity to jump
in and get involved in
things. And if you keep
showing up and keep doing
work, people will notice that
because it's pretty rare, which
I understand as like it,
most people don't have very
much time to spend on
open source. So you get
a PR in here, up
here and there, but if
you have the time to
dedicate to it, people will
take notice. And the more
work you do, the more
work you'll get as you
show yourself to be someone
who enjoys and has time
and is capable of doing
what needs to be done
to keep the project moving.
And that's kind of how
you get rewarded with leaders,
shift positions so far, what,
from what I've seen, It
sounds like what I tell
my kids is that it's
like a big part of
success is just showing up.
But then of course, figuring
out how you can find
the time to show up
while also having a life
is challenging. Everyone in opensource
has that has that issue.
Now, have you found the
time to show up because
this is something that you're
using in your consultancy? Yes.
That's definitely something that motivated
me to start my own
company is that I can
choose to not be earning
money and spend some time
on open source. A lot
of the team members are
lucky enough to be employed.
My  who employs most
of the people who work
full time on rust. There
are some other companies who
let people spend time on
working on open source Russ
stuff. And that's another way
that people get time to
work on Russ things. But
yeah, I'm, I'm very lucky
to have a lot of
savings, not need to work
a hundred percent of my
time so that I have,
I'm able to contribute to
open source because I think
open source in general is
really important. And I think
Rustin particular is a worthwhile
way to spend my time.
Rust is a work worthwhile
way to spend your time.
It's been around for nine
years and it's some people
have said it smells like,
or it is syntactically similar
to C plus plus why
was C plus plus lacking?
And why did someone at
Mozilla need to make rest?
What was, what was wrong
with C plus plus? And
what does Russ try to
solve? So Russ is trying
to solve memory safety problems.
It's trying to be a
replacement for both CNC plus
plus, and B memory safe
across threads as well though.
I would say those are
the big aspects of Russ
that are different. The memory
safety is achieved through this
system of ownership that makes
sure there's only one owner
of a piece of data
at a time. And that
owner is responsible for cleaning
up that data, which those
cleanups are, are inserted by
the compiler so that you
aren't doing operations like Alec
and free, which people mess
up all the time. And
those ownership rules extend across
threads. And the type system
of rest helps enforce that.
So where race conditions, data
races are very easy to
do in C plus plus
and C plus plus is
getting things like the shared
pointers, smart pointers that do
some of this logic, but
rust has it built into
everything by default. So whereas
you have to upgrade your
C plus plus to the
newest version. Then you have
to choose to use the
shared pointers. This is an
abstraction, that's the default to
use in rust. So I
feel like the whole mental
model is different and the
abstractions are built such that
the default is both safe
and fast to use. Then
when people are moving from
C or C plus plus,
or whatever they learned in
school, and then they enter
into the kind of the
world and they start using
go or Java or.net. And
they think that there's two
choices of how one does
memory. There's like a slider
bar and slider bars are
supposed to have like multiple
stops. They're supposed to slide.
But people think that the
slider bar has two choices,
which makes it effectively a
slider bar. That's a checkbox
where it's like, well, either
allocate your own memory or
have a really sophisticated garbage
collector. And there's nothing in
between. It seems like rust
tries to find a better
compromise. Yeah. We're trying to
break the slider into pieces,
be off the slider. A
lot of resources. We talk
about taking tradeoffs that seem
like they're going to, they
have to be one or
the other and saying, what
if it doesn't, what if
we can have both? And
it's been amazing to watch,
watch it evolve. And I
get to use this language
that defies these expectations and,
and makes these trade offs
moot. Hmm. So when I
was doing C and embedded
systems work, I allocate my
own memory. And if I
was a mediocre programmer, which
I am somewhere else, you
know, I would go and
free it. And then you
you'd leak memory, or you
had a whole class of
things, you know, no pointers,
dangly pointers. And then in
the go java.net world, it's
like, well, let's make someone
who's in charge of cleanup,
like a janitor, which is
like, I'm sloppy. So we'll
have a sloppy system clean
up. When you said a
system of ownership, what does
that mean? So It's kind
of like, if you, this
is a metaphor we use
in our video video series,
instead of like having a
janitor, walking around the party
all the time, asking are
you done with that? That
you dump that? Can I
clean this up? It's more
like, if you bring, you
bring your covered dish to
the potluck and you are
responsible for washing the dish
that you brought and cleaning
up what you brought and
you can let other people
use the food you brought
and the plates you bought.
But at the end of
the night, it doesn't matter
who used it. You're the
owner and you're responsible for
cleaning it up and no
one else is going to
do it for you. So
you don't have to worry
about washing something twice. Once
you clean it up, no
one else can use it.
You're going to take it
home. And no one's going
to expect it to still
be there. So I hope
that metaphor helps clear things
up a little bit. No,
let's dig into that a
little bit. So in the
memory, in the garbage collection
world, it's just like chaos.
It's like, Ooh, I'm just
making memory. And I worry
on someone else who is
not me. There's a, we
always talk. We always talk
about single responsibility principle when
we design our large systems,
but no one ever wants
to be responsible for their
own memory. And people are
just making lists and passing
things around by reference and
everything's fine. And someone will
figure it out. And until,
you know, gen one or
gen two or gen three
of the garbage collector, pauses
everything while we stop. And
the janitor cleans up after
the party, and then we're
allowed to continue dancing. You're
saying that with rust, the
compromise is you are in
fact responsible, but it is
you and you alone who
are responsible for your things.
No one else. Yes. And
the compiler is taking care
of this. So any uses
when the owner goes out
of scope, which is kind
of like when you decide
you're going to leave the
party, that's, that's when that
cleanup happens. So the compiler
can see you're going out
of scope. This variable is
going out of scope and
this memory can be cleaned
up now. And the compiler
is going to check that
no one else is currently
using that memory. And if,
if you've written your code
in that way, it's going
to refuse to compile. And
so these checks happen when
you compile your code, it
inserts these statements to clean
up exactly where it knows
that it's safe and correct
to clean up. And there's
nothing happening. No, no determination
of when that happens at
runtime running alongside your code.
Now that's very interesting. So
for people who are listening,
take a moment and absorb
that because a garbage collector
at runtime determines that someone's
going to get and leave
the party. But rust has
figured that out ahead of
time and it's baked in.
So scope exiting happens and
it's almost like an aspect
oriented programming with it. It
looks at the code and
it injects in what would
have been your manual free.
And does it, it does
it for you. Yeah. It's
similar to the concept of
our AI in C plus
plus, which is resource Acquisition
is initialization. Yes. It's a
terrible acronym because to me
it's more about cleaning up,
not the acquisition, that's it?
It seems like when we
were talking about our AI
resource acquisition is initialization in
the, in the late eighties,
it was about accessing resources
where memory wasn't a resource,
but maybe a port was
a resource or a file
handle was a resource. You're
expanding that concept to memory
itself, being a resource in
that, in that sense. And
then do you include reference
counting as well, or you
do not. There is a
reference counted type that you
can choose to use. And
it works in an interesting
way where it's considered a
smart pointer. And when the
last you can have that,
lets you kind of have
multiple owners. And when the
last one goes out of
scope and the reference count
is zero, then it gets
cleaned up. So it's still
kind of fits into this
idea of scope and something
special happening when something goes
out of scope, but you
can opt into doing roughly.
Hmm. Hey friends. Backlog is
an all in one project
and code management tool development
teams have been waiting for
with project management, bug tracking
wikis and get rolled into
one easy to use platform.
Backlog provides the powerful features
that development teams need under
a clean UI that anyone
can use. You can easily
onboard your whole team and
start working on tasks in
minutes, additional features like Gantt
and burdened down charts, make
it easy to manage projects.
Mobile apps, keep your team
connected in simple pricing scales
with you. So you can
stop worrying about per user
charges, build your next project
with backlog. Get a 30
day obligation free trial at
backlog.com/hansel minutes. That's BAC K
L g.com/hansel minutes. There is
an interesting tweet earlier yesterday
by Huda Katz, who said
there has been a little
bit of a, like a
low key controversy going on
Twitter. Cause there's always a
where people have said, you
know, well, you know, rust
got nothing done in 2019
and rust is boring and
I love that even on
the rust homepage, it there's
a, there's actually a wonderful
quote from Chris Dickinson from
NPM that says my biggest
compliment to rust is that
it's boring. And that's an
amazing compliment. And then you
Huda says rust does something
that everyone said was impossible.
When I started programming, being
able to write tens of
thousands of lines of safe
code without the performance costs
incurred by garbage collection. Do
you agree with that? Absolutely.
I think I retweeted it
stepping back and thinking about
that is really uplifting. I
guess when you're in the
day to day of working
on something like this, it's
hard to kind of step
back and, and remember that
you're doing something useful. And
I really think I've, I've
had the opportunity lately to
do a few talks about
how I think rust is
moving the industry forward because
these memory safety problems have
just caused so much, so
many problems. And you said
you were mediocre primary programmer
before. As many of us
are myself included, but even
even the best seed programmers,
even the people who have
learned every single rule that
about undefined behavior and you
know, even people at NASA
who code review every line
for an hour, even those
people make these mistakes in
CNC. Plus plus that leads
to these memory safety problems.
And we've known that this
happens for years and years
and years. I think Microsoft,
someone from the Microsoft security
team did like a survey
of all the windows security
problems and 70% of them
over the last 12 years
where the root cause was
memory safety problems. So like
this is, we keep doing
the same thing over and
over again. And I'm really
feel like rust is changing.
That is trying to stop
making that mistake over and
over again. And so that
we can make some new
mistakes instead. So I really
feel like it's moving us
forward. I'm really honored to
be working on it and
be a part of it.
When we think about how
in the eighties and when
people started really getting into
C plus plus and thinking
about these problems and then
10 years ago when rust
nine years ago in restaurants
introduced. But, but there's still,
it still hasn't taken over
the world. I mean, there's
a lot of enthusiasm around
it, but people still write
C plus plus why isn't
this a slam dunk? Why
isn't this like a viral
concept that's taken over the
planet and we've written rewritten
windows and all complicated systems
and rust. Well, the, the
code that's existing, it is
existing and doing what it
needs to do. And there's
a lot of legacy code
out there and I'm very
sympathetic to, if it's not
broken, don't fix it. So
the, the places that we're
trying to get rust adopted
are the places that are
still using CNC plus plus,
which is already kind of
a legacy decision. And those
places are generally large enterprises
that are very risk averse
and slow to move on
anything. So I'm not at
all surprised that despite the
enthusiasm for rust, our adoption
has been slow. And I
think we're happy to be
around and be ready for
the slow adoption because the
types of people we are
trying to get to use
rust are not the type
to make a quick decision.
You're right. This is not
something that you just jump
into. No, it has there
been talk of making the
OnRamp or the bridge between
CNC plus plus to rush
more or easy? Is it
naive of me to think
that if there were a
converter, There are converters, there's
one called SITA to Russ
that Galois has contributed to
the open source community. There's
binge gen bind gen. I'm
never quite sure how to
say it, but a something
that generates bindings in Russ
too. Mm I'm not sure
which way it goes either
in Rustici well saucer in
C plus plus the rest.
I think it's tough when
you have a lot of
function overloading in C plus
plus cause Russ doesn't have
overloading. I think that gets
tricky. But I also have,
I have a talk where
I took a C library
called softly. It's a compression
tool and I rewrote it.
It's written in C. I
rewrote it to rust using
the foreign function interface to
do one function at a
time. And I kept the
test passing at every commit,
which I think proves that
you can do like an
incremental rewrite by using this
FFI and you don't even
have to finish. You could
stop at any point when
you've gotten enough value from
the rewrite, you could start
with the parts that changed
the most. You could start
with the parts that are
the root cause of the
most bugs parts that crash
the most. And if you
get what you're looking to
get out of the rewrite
bin, there's more important things
that come up, you could
stop if you do this
in an incremental sort of
Right. And then they're there
in the sea world. There's
things like, you know, Lipsey
for single third programs and
lib CMT for multi-threaded programs,
rust is known for like
highly concurrent systems. Was that
like a fundamental tenant of
the thing? Like, wow, we're
doing this, let's make sure
it works when there's a
lot of threads of doing
a lot of stuff. Yeah.
That was one of the
main goals. The reason that
Missoula is so invented so
invested in it is that
they want they're slowly rewriting
Firefox and Ross and Firefox
is a, a mostly C
plus plus program that has
it's purpose is to run
on trusted code from the
internet. So they're very interested
in closing any security holes.
And they're also interested in
improving performance by parallelizing, everything
that they can. And they
have tried to parallelize stuff
in C plus plus and
found it that it just
increased the memory safety problems
they had. So when rust
evolved out of Missoula research,
then they created servo, which
is an experimental browser written
entirely in rest. And now
they are pulling components out
of servo and into Firefox.
And the Firefox quantum release
that happens, I think a
year or two ago, one
of the big parts of
quantum that, that improved the
performance was the CSS. Surrendering
was the CSS rendering from
servo that was written in
Ruston pulled over. So that
like parallelizes the entire rendering
of the CSS on the
page. I remember when I
went to quantum as a
user, like it was the
same Firefox that I felt
good about it ran just
as well. So nothing dramatic
happened, which presumably was the
right idea and not noticing
was success. Yes. Hopefully, and
noticing that it was a
little faster, but not noticing
that anything is broken Well
and in a world where
the processors have so many
more native processors, native cores
and the ability to do,
you know, hyper-threading and things
like that, we're going to
want concurrency baked into our
languages. Yeah. Yeah. So if
I understand correctly and there's
operating system threads, you know,
Linux has native threads. Windows
has a native notion of
threads and then programming languages
have this idea of a
thing called green threads, which
is like not an operating
system construct. It's just their
own vibe on what green
threads are. But since rust
is kind of a lowest
level language, the rust standard
library provides a support for
threads. So when you say
thread spawn, you know, it's
real, it's low level, you're
telling the operating system to
spawn a thread, what kind
of problems go wrong when
you do that in CNC
plus plus where you just
like make threads, put data
on the thread and start
going to town that rusts
solves. So I haven't actually
done a whole lot of
CNC plus plus programming myself
because I, I am not
capable of doing anything safely.
Well, that's actually kind of
cool actually, if I may,
because then you're saying that
you've been doing Russ for
so long that this has
freed you from that kind
of administrivia, which is the
whole point of the language.
Yeah. From what I understand
it is that you can
just kind of pass pointers
back and forth across threads
and you have to keep
track of who's cleaning that
up. Or who's accessing that
when, and who's modifying the
data that it's being it's
being pointed to. And if
that pointer is still valid
and all of this is
enforced by the rust type
system, such that you can
kind of Mark a particular
data structures as, okay, we
can share this between threads
because it's synchronized access to
it, the synchronize, or we
can move ownership of this
piece of data from one
thread to another, and then
you're no longer allowed to
access it in the original
thread. So this is a
system of ownership ties into
the multithreaded programming. Right. That
is really interesting because even
like C is, is somewhat,
I wouldn't say threatening, but
intimidating to me and multithreaded
C or C plus plus
it's like, Oh my goodness.
You know, I don't want
to have to go back
and get my PhD, but
I definitely, I feel like
the rust compiler is like,
it's like a pair programmer
that is helping me to
get everything right. That you
have to, you have to
manage yourself and C and
C plus plus, and I'm,
I don't have the brain
power for that. I'm more
interested in, in whatever problem
I'm trying to solve. I
don't want to have to
think about, okay, is this
point are still valid or
not? Or is this over
here? Or who's responsible this,
did I clean that up?
I don't want to have
to think about that. Like,
computers are really good at
taking care of all this
trivia, all this administration and
making sure you get it
right every single time computers
can do that. So that's
what I feel like it's
doing for me. Well, and
here we are like 40,
50 years past CNC plus
plus, and I know that
there's probably a lot of
people who will email me
and say that I, I
program in CNC plus plus
every day. But think about
how far computers have come
in the last 50 years.
And we're still thinking about
this stuff, shouldn't our language,
do it for us. And
I love that, you know,
I'm kind of bumbling around
and asking these questions and
I don't know if they're
good or not. And you're
like, well, I don't really
know because I am a
rushed programmer. I don't think
about those things I know
about threads. And I think
about threads, but worrying about
hurting myself with a thread
is it's not beyond my
space. That's, that's a really
a Testament to the language
itself. So this idea of,
of ownership goes cross threads.
And then you said that
you can do both moving
and borrowing. So this idea
of ownership can't be broken,
you have to be specific,
which thread owns a piece
of data. Exactly. Interesting. I
saw that there was an
article or I'm not sure
it was a book that
was called fearless, fearless concurrency
in, in rust. Is there
a sense of you, you
don't have things that you
have to worry about. You
can move without fear when
you're coding in rust. Definitely
it's again, I don't have
a whole lot of experience
with CNCS plus, but I
remember in Ruby, the story
is kind of similar that
there's not a whole lot
of support for writing concurrent
stuff in Ruby. And I
would use concurrent libraries in
Ruby and they would crash
a lot and do weird
things. And that kind of
scared me off from trying
to write it myself. But
yeah, I, I don't feel
that way in rest. And
it's definitely, I've heard from
other companies that, you know,
hire people who are more
junior, who, if they were
writing CNC plus plus you'd
want to review their code
a whole lot to make
sure it was right, but
the compilers doing that review
in rust. So if the
code compiles you, you've already
had that code review basically,
and you can look more
at the logic than the
pointers and passing data around
between threads. Well, that brings
up a really interesting question.
And I appreciate that. You've
had me think about this
is that if I'm going
to go and hire someone
in their mid twenties, this
is someone who may have
never been exposed to see
her play flushed or thought
about any of these problems.
So how would you test
them for their understanding of
concurrency without accidentally testing or
quizzing them on the historical
context of languages or, you
know, dead or otherwise that
they would have never have
used? Like, I want them
to understand how threads work
and how to move data
around, but to your point,
they may have never done
that. That works. So should
they have studied, you know,
Latin when I'm asking them
just thinking Well, so I
think there's still, this, this
is really interesting question. There's
still things that are possible
in rust. It's still possible
to create deadlocks. It's still
possible to have resource starvation.
It's still possible to be
holding onto a lock longer
than you think you're holding
onto it. It's just that
the memory safety part is,
is solved for you. So
I think there there's, it's
still, you still have to
think about how am I
going to parallelize this problem?
Like where, where is this
is the, where can we
do things that are separate,
that are independent and where
do we need to synchronize
the data together? Where can
we spawned something and check
on it to come back?
So I think more of
the concepts of how you
do the work in a
concurrent or parallel fashion is
still definitely relevant, but it's
less of the, is this
undefined behavior or not, or
is it possible that this
thread ends before this other
thread and you don't think
it possible? And it actually
blows everything up. That's really
helpful to think about. Yeah,
it does. Because as someone
who is of a certain
age, I don't want to
say to a new person
that I'm going to higher
order my children. You need
to learn how to change
your own oil and how
to, you know, double clutch,
a stick shift in a
world where lifts exist. You
know, you don't need to
disassemble a carburetor. I don't
want to accidentally ask someone
how to disassemble a carburetor
if that's just simply not
a thing anymore. But I
would like to have a
general sense of how cars
move in the world. So
applying that analogy to programming
languages, I think is a
fair one. Yeah. And I
definitely, I'm not of the
school, obviously since I don't
know, see intimately, I'm not
at a school that says,
Oh, you to be a
good software program. Are you
happy to have a seat?
Because for one thing that's
not, then why not? You
have to learn assembly, which
I had a little assembling
college. I understand the concept
of the family. You, you
just don't programming and assembly
on a day to day
basis unless your, your work
is at that level. It's
completely possible to do meaningful
work at a higher level
in computer programming. We have
come that far, that you
are able to do that
is not required for you
to know what every bit
of the computer is doing
at any point. And it's
not actually possible for anyone
to hold that in your
head anymore. Computers are doing
too much. The processors are,
are rearranging your instructions in
ways that no one even
understands much anymore. Exactly. So,
yes, I definitely think it's,
there are concepts that transcend
and concepts like how do
we split up this work
that are a higher level
concepts that you should understand?
And, and there are times
when you will need to
dive into deeper things to
figure out why something isn't
working or why it's slow
or things like that. But
generally like we, we made
these abstractions, we should use
them. Exactly. I appreciate that.
And if you go to
rust-lang.org, you can learn how
Russ can set you up
for success. Even on embedded
systems or low resource devices
on networking systems, that'll even
compile to WebAssembly. It's a
very welcoming community and it
appears to be really a
language for everybody. That's what
we're trying to do. I
appreciate that. And folks can
check out your book from
no starch press. We'll make
sure we include a link
in the show notes, the
rust programming language with Steve
Clubnick and yourself, Carol Nichols. And
of course your rust in
motion videos available at Manning.
We'll put that in the
show notes as well. Thank
you so much, Carol Nichols for
chatting with me today. Thank
you for chatting with me.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week. .